# How you can use DIXON-COLES to beat football markets - YouTube
Have you ever looked at the betting
markets and seen Manchester City at 13
to8 and wondered how did they come up
with that price? How can I come up with
my own price and can I beat the book
makers and the betting exchanges? Well,
my name is Tom Brownley from
bookiebashing.net And in this video, I
want to show you how to come up with
your own price for Manchester City to
beat Newcastle United. We'll break it
down into step by step. And look, you're
not going to need a PhD in statistics to
understand this. It is fairly
straightforward. You won't even need a
subscription to any value betting
software. All you're going to need is a
pen and paper or preferably Microsoft
Excel. and I'll show you how you can put
together a worksheet to model the
probability of correct score and match
odds so that you can see if you can get
an edge over the market. And people
often say, well, you can't beat the
millions of pounds that the traders have
got in their odds compiling departments
at the book makers. I promise you, you
can. And I'll show you at the end of
this video how profitable this
methodology would be historically on bet
fair exchange.
So let's start by looking at an example
tonight. Here is Newcastle versus
Manchester City on bet fair exchange. So
this is meant to be efficient. The
back's 100.7 and the lay is 99.6. So the
fair odds are somewhere in between
these. Newcastle are 2.8. 84 Manchester
City are 2.58
and the draw is 3.75 to back. So how are
we going to come up with our own
probabilities to compare against these
odds? Well, our input into the model is
going to be XG, expected goals, the
average number of goals we expect these
teams to score in this match. There's a
variety of ways of estimating XG. we can
look at their last 10, 20, 30 games and
then weight this average against the
current opposition. So if they've been
playing weaker teams and you know
Manchester City is a stronger team
presumably than most teams Newcastle
have played recently, we can weight that
number. Another way of doing it is just
borrowing XG from the markets. That is a
lot faster. You can go on to any spread
betting site and then just have a look
at the number of expected goals in the
game. For me, I've got my own numbers.
I've got 1.5 for Newcastle and 1.58
expected goals for Manchester City. So,
let's plug these into an Excel sheet.
So, if I have my XG here and Newcastle
is the home team, Manchester City the
away team, and I predict there's going
to be 1.5 goals for Newcastle and 1.58
goals for Manchester City. And so now my
objective is to turn these figures into
probability of Newcastle winning the
game, Manchester City winning the game
and some correct score numbers as well.
So the question is how do I turn these
numbers into match odds for home away
and draw. So before I do that, just a
little bit of mathematical background.
This is the only bit of maths we're
really going to touch on in the entire
video. We're going to use a pluson
probability distribution. Don't fall
asleep. Wake up at the back. It's not as
dull as it sounds. And we're only going
to skirt over this. What is a plus on
probability distribution? It's a
discrete probability distribution that
estimates the number of events that will
occur in a fixed interval of time and
space given that those events are random
like goals. What do we mean by discrete?
Well, we mean the events are countable
like 0 1 2 3 4 and they go up in those
whole number integers. So, we don't
score in 1.5s and 2.5s. And this isn't
rugby or NFL. It's great for football.
So, we're going to use pluson as a first
model for taking those average expected
goals and creating a correct score
market. Let's do that now. So, our first
step is going to be to create a correct
score market. We want to know the
probability of nil nil. Why? Why does
that help us work out the probability of
the match odds? Well, what is the
probability of a draw? It's just the
probability of 0 0 + 1 1 + 2 2 + 3 3 + 4
4 and 55. I mean, we can keep on going
until it's statistically irrelevant. We
might not want to work out the
probability of 330 against 330 because
330 330 has never happened in football.
So, we can stop at some statistically
relevant juncture. Breaking this down,
let's start with just working out the
probability that this match is going to
finish nil nil. If I put my home score
here and I put my away score here and
I'm going to have nil and I'm going to
have nil. Now, as we said, we're going
to use our pluson distribution, but we
don't need to do any funky maths or use
a calculator. This is why I've asked to
have access to a Microsoft Excel
spreadsheet. All we need to do is plug
the following equation into Microsoft
Excel. And look, if you don't want to
follow the equations on this video,
there's a link in the description that
will take you to a blog where I've got a
spreadsheet. In fact, this spreadsheet
that you're looking at, you can download
it. You can use the equations there. So,
I'm going to use a plus on distribution.
Let's put it here. And to do that in
Excel, I'm just going to type in equals
pluson
dot dist plus distribution. Open the
bracket and it's going to ask me what
target are you looking at? Well, the
target I'm looking at happens to be
zero. So I could type in zero here or I
could just make it this cell. And then
what is the mean? Well, the mean
is 1.5. That's how many goals we expect
Newcastle to get.
And then we finish the equation with
false because we want exactly zero
goals. And that will give us the
probability of Newcastle scoring zero.
So to get nil nil, we just have to take
that and multiply it by the pluson.ist
of Manchester City getting zero which is
E4 given Manchester City's XG which is
B5 and again false. And when we do all
of that, Excel tells us that the
probability of nil nil in this game is
4.59%.
So that's nil nil. Now let's build up
the probability of a few different score
lines. So I'm going to assume that
Newcastle are going to score up to 10
goals. And I kind of don't care. I think
it's going to be statistically
irrelevant after 10. I don't really see
a lot of 11 goals scored by a team in
this match. The only exception sometimes
I have is if I'm modeling something like
USA women versus Thailand women.
Occasionally then you might want to
consider modeling past 10 goals and
bookie bashing. We go up to 2020. Um
haven't ever found a need to go further
than that. So I have all of my score
lines of Newcastle to score between zero
and 10 goals and Manchester City to get
zero goals. So let's just repeat this
pattern, but we'll repeat it with
Manchester City getting one goal. And by
doing this, we can build up a correct
score grid. So that's all score lines
from nil nil to 10-10. And I can just
copy my column H all the way to the
bottom.
And I now have my probabilities. If I
sum all of my probabilities up, I sum to
100.00%.
So I know that I statistically don't
really need to go beyond 1010. The odds
of something happening beyond 1010 are
0.0
to two significant figures. Now that's
the correct scores. But what about the
outcome of the match? What about the
match odds? Well, as we said, the sum of
all the draws is just the draw price.
And the sum of all the home wins is the
home price and the sum of all the away
wins is the away price. So in this
column F, I just need to know what is
the outcome. And the outcome is well, if
they equal each other, it's going to be
a draw obviously.
And if the home score is higher than the
away score, then it'll be at home win,
which is one. And if it's neither of
those things, it has to be an away win
of two. I can copy that outcome all the
way down. Now let's summarize all of
those probabilities. So we have the home
win, the draw, and the away win here.
And when we do that, Excel will tell us
that the probability of Newcastle
winning this match using PON is 36.3.
The draw is 23.9 and the away is 39.7.
And if we want to get decimal odds out
of that probability, we just take the
reciprocal to the power of minus one.
And we see that Newcastle are 2.75, the
draw is 4.18,
and Manchester City is 2.51.
Now, the astute amongst you might be
looking at those odds and you might
think, "But hold on, the exchange said
that the draw was 3.75. Here we have
4.18." And you'd be absolutely right.
Because whilst pson can generate a
correct score market, it's been proven
not to be perfect. What tends to happen
with pson is it underestimates the
probability of 0 0 and to a lesser
extent 1 one and it overestimates the
probability of narrow wins of 1 nil and
nil one. The reason for this is right
back at the beginning, we said that we
needed a discrete probability
distribution because we assumed that the
goals were random and happened at fixed
intervals. In reality, the longer the
match goes on at nil nil, the higher the
probability that it's going to finish
nil nil relative to pre-match
expectations. And that's because as a
match goes on and no goals are scored,
teams start to get defensive, less
attacked minded and so there are
realworld changes. The events aren't
quite random and fixed in nature. So we
can't just use a pure pluson probability
distribution to model this problem.
Step Forward. Mark Dixon and Stuart
Coohl's with their landmark paper
modeling football association scores and
inefficiencies in the football betting
market from the journal of the Royal
Statistical Society series C applied
statistics 1997 which was a hugely
influential piece of work in the world
of sports analytics and predicting
football matches and is still used as
the gold standard of models.
to predict the outcome of a football
match. So what does Dixon Coohl's do?
Well, it takes those four score lines
whereon underestimates and overestimates
and it just adjusts them to make them
more accurate. So it takes nil nil and
to a lesser extent 1 one and it adjusts
them so that the output no longer
underestimates the probability and it
takes 1 nil and nil one and it adjusts
them so that the output no longer
overestimates
these probabilities from 2-nil onwards
it's exactly the same it matches plus on
so how much does Dixon calls adjust nil
nil 1 nil nil one and 1-1. Well,
actually it can vary by competitions.
Some competitions you see a lot of
underestimation in nil nil. Other
competitions there's less so. And this
adjustment factor is called a row
number. Now, we don't really need to
know what this is. All we need to know
is that other people have done a lot of
work on the row number and we have a
list of row numbers by competition over
at bookiebashing.net. net if you are
ever interested to do this particular
exercise but you've got a game in La
Liga or the Bundesliga in the Premier
League historically it has been shown to
be minus 0.13
so that's what we're going to use in our
model here and in column I next to
proson I'm now going to have my Dixon
Kohl's number now here in nil nil what I
want to do is I want adjust this nil nil
by a function of Newcastle's goals,
Manchester City's goals and this
particular row number. And here is the
equation that I've stuck into Excel. It
just takes the probability of pluson for
nil nil and it multiplies it by 1 minus
the home xG times the away xG times the
row number. And if we do that, we end up
with 6.01%. 01%.
For 1 nil, it's a slightly different
equation because it is overestimating 1
nil plus hon is. And so what we're going
to do is we're going to take the plus on
probability and we're going to multiply
that by 1 plus Manchester City's xG
multiplied by the row number. The
opposite will apply for nil one where
we're going to multiply by 1 +
Newcastle's xG multiplied by the row
number. And for one one finally it's
just going to be the probability of plus
on multiplied by one minus the row
number. Every other probability will be
the same as plus on. And so now let's
see what match odds probability we get
with the Dixon Coohl's method. So if I
copy over the plus on to the Dixon
Coohl's, we now see that Dixon Coohl's
estimates the probability of Newcastle
to be 34.9%
the draw at 26.8%.
And if I turn these into decimal odds,
we see 2.87 for Newcastle, 3.74 for the
draw, and 2.61 for Manchester City. And
what we see is those numbers align
perfectly with the efficient exchange
market. So now we know we can take an xG
of 1.50 for Newcastle and 1.58 for
Manchester City and by using a row
number of minus0.13.
We get exactly the same numbers that
they get on the exchange. Okay, we have
some confidence that the model works.
And if you want to give it a go
yourself, you can download the
spreadsheet from the blog. The link is
in the description below this video. All
of that's very nice. But now you might
be thinking, great, what a wonderful
academic exercise, but how can I make
some money out of this?
So, can we make any money using Dixon
Coals? Let's have a look at 3,090
football matches in the Premier League
and the Championship between 2022 and
the beginning of 2026.
And we're going to take the correct
scores in there because I've got all of
the closing lines for the correct
scores. And we're going to back with a
unit win strategy to win £100 in every
single bet. So, you adjust the stake
based on the magnitude of the odds.
First of all, let's take a look at bare
exchange. we would see this graph here.
It's an efficient market. It converges
to zero. Actually, about a 0.1%
profit. That's what you would expect
with an efficient market. It doesn't
include commission. If we include
commission, we see a £5,000 loss minus
one and a half% return on investment.
Almost all of which goes to bet fair
exchange in commission. Now, let's have
a look at Dixon Coohl's. Let's use a
strategy where we're only going to back
where the bet fair price, the exchange
price is higher than the Dixon Coohl's
method. And if we do that, we see this
graph here. This is to win £100 on each
bet with commission of 2% applied at the
exchange. And now we go from minus
£5,000 to plus £15,000. Look, of course,
there are some caveats. We did go in a
three and a half thousand bet break even
run right at the beginning of that and
it does assume we're able to bet on all
of these markets with enough liquidity
at the closing lines. But it does show
that there is potential to beat the
markets with dicks and coals. So look,
you don't need any fancy software to do
this. You can mock up your own Excel
spreadsheet. If you want to use mine,
the one I've used in the video, there is
a link in the description below this
video. It will take you to a blog. You
can download the spreadsheet used in
this video for free. Use it to model
Dixs and Coals by yourself. All you'll
need is XG as input, which you can
generate yourself by looking
historically. will do a video on how to
do that sometime in the future or even
just borrow it from the markets by using
an inverse plus on probability
distribution from over 2.5 goals looking
at the spreads. There's a number of
different ways of taking it from the
markets or even just use some value
betting software which does speed up the
process for you. At bookiebashing.net
net. We have a list of all matches in
primary, secondary, even tertiary
competitions with the xG for home and
away teams. We even have a Dixon Coohl's
calculator that will tell you the
correct score market and the win odds
and your Asian handicap and match odds
of both teams to score and all markets
that relate to home and away and match
goals in football matches. Now there are
more advanced statistical techniques
that can be used to analyze the
performance of predictive models such as
the Brier test, the log loss test, but
they all show the same thing as the 100
pound unit win analysis and that is that
Dixon Coohl's can be a profitable model
for predicting correct scores match odds
in football matches. My name's Tom
Brownley from bookiebashing.net. If you
enjoyed this video, don't forget to
click like and subscribe below. And you
can watch another video like this just
up here.
[cheering]